
Multiplayer online battle arenas (MOBA), also called Action Real Time Strategy games (ARTS) are a video game genre with a surprisingly long history and a vast and enthusiast community. Research on MOBA-style games has greatly increased in the recent couple of years, but the area is still relatively unexplored by academics (Ferrari, 2013). In a typical MOBA, two teams of players combat against each other, with every player controlling one character with various abilities and advantages that improve over the course of a game as the player gains experience points and purchases better items by gathering in-game resources. The objective of the game is to destroy a structure in the opposite team's base, with the assistance of friendly artificial intelligence (AI) controlled units that assist the team and march forward towards the enemy base along set paths. Throughout the game, players gain resources and experience by killing enemy players' characters or these AI-units (minions) spawned at the enemy team's base, or by destroying the enemy team's defensive structures. The resources can then be used to purchase upgrades that make the team more powerful, with the intention to overpower and beat the enemy team. 

GAMEPLAY IN LEAGUE OF LEGENDS
League of Legends follows the gameplay of a pretty typical MOBA, where the player - called the 'summoner' - controls a character - called a 'champion', and engages in games against a team of other players or AI opponents. There are currently a total of 121 champions, all of which can be classified to types, or roles, according to their strengths and weakenesses and their purpose in gameplay. During the game, the player's champion becomes more powerful by gaining levels and resources from killing the opposing team's champions, controlled by other players or AI, and minions that regularly spawn on the enemy team's side of the map. 

Most MOBAs only have one arena that players can compete upon, and the layout for that arena typically does not change, unless it needs to be patched due to some game play balance issues. League of Legends offers its players a few maps with static layouts, each with slightly different play style. The most popular of the maps is called the Summoner's Rift (Figure 1), which is divided into three "lanes" - the top, middle and bottom lane - which are paths followed by the spawned minions. Between the lanes there is an area called the "jungle", where a number of neutral monsters reside. The jungle is sometimes considered a lane of its own, and some champions can work as 'junglers', roaming in the jungle and collecting rewards and buffs by killing the neutral monsters, assisting freely on the other lanes. There are also two bases - one for each of the two teams - where players spawn at the beginning of the game and after dying, where they can purchase items, and where the nexus that must be destroyed to finish the game resides. Experienced players who engage in games in a fixed team typically "specialize" in one or two preferred roles or locations, with relatively little variability from game to game. 

Figure 1. A map explaining the layout and the different areas in the Summoner's Rift.
[MAP IMAGE BY NARISHM]
Note. Map drawn by Narish, reproduced with permission. Fix this citation later. Source: http://narishm.deviantart.com/art/League-of-Legends-Summoner-s-Rift-Regions-Map-413345149

On the Summoners Rift, Twisted Treeline, and Howling Abyss maps, the game is over once one team manages to destroy a structure called the 'Nexus' in the enemy team's base. Other maps have variations of rules and objectives, such as Dominion on the Crystal Scar, where each team's Nexus weakens if the opposing team controls three or more of the five towers on the map. 

League of Legends offers a few different options for gameplay. All players can engage in "Normal" games - unranked games against either a team of players or opponents controlled by artificial intelligence, where the game outcome does not impact players' in-game ranking, but does reward experience points - which gradually increase the player's level - and influence points, which can be used to purchase access to new champions or to make cosmetic changes to the champions the player already owns. All players begin at level 1, and gain levels by playing normal games. The benefit of gaining levels is unlocking so-called Mastery Points and Rune Page slots which allow the player to boost certain aspects of their gameplay by improving the overall strength of their champion during battles. Once the player reaches the maximum level of thirty and has access to at least sixteen champions, they are eligible for ranked games. 

Ranked games are the competitive alternative of normal games - a draft mode game type, where players battle in teams and get placed on a game ladder according to their wins and losses against other players. Once they begin with ranked games, players begin with ten placement games to establish a hidden match-making rating, which is used to match them with equally skilled opponents and adjusted according to wins and losses. Players belong to six tiers, the lowest being Bronze, and may progress through Silver, Gold, Platinum, Diamond and Challenger, depending on their success against opponents of different skill level. Each tier, other than Challenger, is further split into five divisions. Players must win a best-of-three Division Series to move up a division, or a best-of-five Promotion Series to move up a tier. Once the player gains a tier, they cannot lose it except by four weeks of insufficient play in the particular ranked mode (non-premade, three-versus-three or five-versus-five). 

Three independent play modes exist for ranked games, and so players can have a total of three different rankings. Two modes are for premade teams, where players queue in organized teams, and the third mode is for non-premade teams. For the premade teams, players can queue in a team of three people (three-versus-three), or in a team with five people (five-versus-five), and in the non-premade teams, players queue either alone (Solo-queue) or with one other person (Dual-queue), and the team is topped up to a total of five players by adding other solo- or dual-queued random players with similar match making rating. 

Reaching level thirty can take a few months of casual play and due to the level requirement, most ranked players should already have sufficient experience to master the basics of the gameplay. The tiers and divisions can be used as a measure of gameplay performance, and since players' rankings are derived from PvP encounters, this measure of game performance is the outcome of direct comparisons between players and their teams. From this perspective, the differences between ranked League of Legends players can be used to research what characteristics impact the performance outcomes of individuals with a tangible level of expertise in their particular domain. Essentially, these are not so much comparisons of expert and novice players, but comparisons between players of different skill with a considerable level of experience.


http://trendblog.net/league-of-legends-changing-esports-scene-better/
- Riot plays its pro teams a yearly salary 
- teams also have sponsors and make additional salary by streaming games 
- Riot pays around eight million dollars in prize money throughout the season, with the world finals alone paying $1.000.000 for the world champion
- US immigration services regard League Champion Series players as professional athletes 







Cooperation is an extremely important aspect of performance in MOBA, because the game style contains a compounding cost of poor game play decisions (Ferrari, 2013). A poor decision in game causes a snow-ball effect on the team's performance. For instance, a player dying in game grants large quantities of gold to the opposite team's players, and they use it for gear upgrades and other boosts that make their champions more powerful. Hasty or aggressive decisions without the coordination of the team lead to unfortunate outcomes for the entire team (Lanz, 2013). On the other hand, a bold, swift move with good team coordination behind it can propel the situation into the opposite direction, and cause a negative snowball effect to roll on the opposite team's side. To assess the team's level of coordination and cooperation, I decided to administer a team cohesion inventory that assesses both social and task-oriented group integration and involvement.


Lantz, J. (2013). “The Snowball Effect: DotA vs. Hokra.” In Machinam, 16 April
2012, http://www.decisionproblem.com/inmachinam/?p=82.

Ferrari, S. (2013) From Generative to Conventional Play: MOBA and League of Legends, Proceedings of DiGRA 2013: DeFragging Game Studies, Volume 1 (1), 1-17.






LEAGUE SYSTEM FROM http://leagueoflegends.wikia.com/wiki/League_system

League system is a ranking system to find other players of a similar skill level to play with or against. In seasons one and two, the system used a single ladder with ranking determined by Elo rating system. In season three, the system uses six tiers with five divisions per tier, where ladder rankings within a league are determined by League Points (LP) and hidden Match Making Rating (MMR). In season 4, a new tier between Challenger and Diamond I has been added: the Master tier.

Each ranked game you win earns you League Points while each lost one decreases your current LP. The exact amount of lost or earned League Points per game depends on your hidden Match Making Rating. If you have higher MMR than a set amount for your division you gain more LP per won game and lose less LP per lost game, if your MMR is lower you gain less and lose more LP per game.

There is also League Points inactivity decay over time, by a set amount, if you haven't played ranked in 28 days or 10 days if you are in Master or Challenger Tier. It decays per the set amount every 7 days afterwards until you play a ranked game. The amount of LP that you lose per decay period depends on the tier that you're in:

Bronze - 0
Silver - 0
Gold - 0
Platinum - 35
Diamond - 50
Master & Challenger - 250
Notes:

While you're inactive, you're hidden from the ladder view for everyone except yourself.
Match Making Rating doesn't decay when LP decay occurs.
Promotions Series will end after 28 days (even if you play games within 28 days)